Conscious rap emerged as a hip-hop subgenre in the late 1980s and early 1990s that was particularly focused on socially and politically conscious themes. It addressed issues like racism, social inequality, and poverty that were so prevalent in marginalized communities. 

In terms of strengths, conscious rap served as a platform for artists to raise more awareness about the issues affecting their communities. The subgenre made these issues accessible to a wider audience. Examples of this can be seen in the songs of artists like Public Enemy, with albums like "It Takes a Nation of Millions to Hold Us Back". This album addressed issues like racism, brutality, and social injustice. The song "Rebel Without a Pause" has lyrics like "Radio -- Suckers never play me / On the mix, they just okay me". Public Enemy's frustration with their lack of radio artime was a recurring theme in this album (Genius). Rap was only only played on the radio on Friday and Saturday nights. Even on those days, the radio would only play the instrumentals and mute out the vocals. 

In terms of weaknesses, conscious rap did not have much mainstream appeal compared to other, more commercially successful subgenres within hip-hop. The politically and socially conscious nature of the lyrics often alienated mainstream audiences and as a result, the subgenre didn't get much radio airtime. Additionally, some critics argued that conscious rap was "preaching to the choir" -- e.g., the message only reached people already aware of the social issues and sympathetic to the message. This limited the subgenre's potential to reach broader audiences and actually affect widespread social change. An example of this phenomenon can be seen in artists like Talib Kweli. Kweli is well-known for having introspective lyrics and socially conscious themes -- he is able to deliver complex sociopolitical messages with virtuosic lyricism. However, he was not able to find mainstream success, and instead only has a niche appeal. 
