DJing, MCing, graffiti and breakdancing have all had huge influences on the culture of hip-hop. 

DJing is a foundational element of hip-hop culture. DJs like Kool Herc used turntables and mixing techniques to create music never heard before, such as the breakbeat (a repeated sample of a drumbeat that was usually syncopated and used as a basis for dance music). DJ Kool Herc's legendary parties at 1520 Sedgewick Avenue are often credited as the birthplace of hip-hop, with his innovative use of a double turntable setup. Using this setup and "playing the frantic grooves at the beginning or in the middle of a song" (NY Magazine), Kool Herc created a beat that got dancers excited and one for MCs to rap on. 

MCs were the precursors to modern hip-hop artists. MCs like Coke La Rock accompanied DJ Kool Herc's beats by improvising rhymes and verses to engage the crowd. MCing also gave a voice to underrepresented communities by talking about the experiences and dreams of the people in these communities. Songs like "Rappers Delight" by The Sugarhill Gang marked the first hip-hop single to achieve mainstream commercial success, bringing MCing to a wider audience and solidifying its place within hip-hop culture. 

Graffiti, while often overlooked as part of hip-hop due to its visual medium, actually played a crucial role in how hip-hop was represented outside of its music. Graffiti served as a way for marginalized youth to express themselves through art, and also challenged what art could really be. Pioneering artists like Phase II espoused an anti-establishment mentality that translated well to hip-hop. Graffiti was one of the first art forms to express resistance -- putting your name on something that was technically public property was similar to the way DJing and MCing challenged conventional music notions, and how b-boying challenged what dancing was. 

Finally, b-boying, or breakdancing, had a huge influence on hip-hop. Breakdancing was a new style of dancing invented in the Bronx that incorporated acrobatic movements like spins, freezes, and power moves. This new style of dancing was used to accompany the new hip-hop beats created by DJs like Kool Herc. B-boys would improvise moves during these "breaks" to compete against other dancers. Breakdancing was the physical manifestation of hip-hop culture, and popular films like "Wild Style" and "Beat Street" cemented their place in hip-hop culture.




