The emergence of gangsta rap in the 1980s was deeply intertwined with the sociopolitical conditions of Los Angeles at the time. The key factors that contributed to this rise were economic inequality, racial tensions and police brutaility, gang culture and violence, the war on drugs and the crack epidemic, and media attention and commercialization. 

First, economic inequality contributed a great deal to the creation of gangsta rap in LA. The 1980s were a time when the gap between the rich and poor in LA was widening fast due to deindustrialization and the decline of factory jobs. As a result, African-American and Hispanic communities were disproportionately affected by unemployment and poverty, which led to feeling marginalized.

Second, racial tensions in Los Angeles were at a breaking point due to the numerous incidents of police brutality and discrimination -- especially against African-American and Hispanic communities. Events like the beating of Rodney King in 1991 further fueled anger and resentment. 

Third, gang culture and violence was a huge part of many Los Angeles neighborhoods, with gangs like the crips and bloods having turf wars leading to loss of life. LA gangs, similar to the ones in New York, offered a sense of identity and protection in these communities that hte authorities couldn't provide. 

Fourth, Reagan's War on Drugs and the crack epidemic disproportionately targeted minority communities. The introduction of affordable crack cocaine in these neighborhoods exacerbated already brewing tensions and increased gang violence and crime. Many gangsta rap songs highlighted the realities of drug dealing and addiction, reflecting the experiences of youngsters growing up in these communities. 

Finally, the thing that finally propelled gangsta rap to the mainstream was the media attention and commercialization that happened to the genre. Record labels saw the potential popularity of this new genre and began signing artists like Ice Cube. Commercialized rap like the St. Ides mixtape by Ice Cube helped truly propel gangsta rap to the mainstream, and spread awareness of the genre to other populations
